---
layout: post
title: "Bosch Compress 3000 Review"
---

12 months ago we used a [state government subsidy](https://www.solar.vic.gov.au/solar-hot-water-rebate) to replace our gas hot water
system with an electric heat pump one, planning to power it as much as possible
while the sun shines on our solar panels. We chose the Bosch Compress 3000. 

![bosch-image](/images/bosch-compress-3000.png)

It's an all-in-one unit, with the compressor sitting on top of a 270 litre
tank. It draws 600W for the heat pump, and there's a backup heating element for
temperatures below 0℃ (which we've disabled). I believe most owners configure
it to run on a timer (either at night for cheap power, or during the day for
solar power). However the controller can also integrate with some solar
inverters (like our Fronius Galvo) and run the heat pump when excess solar
power is being exported to the grid. Free hot water!

It's not the most efficient unit around. This table from the manual shows
typical heating times under various conditions.

![bosch-table](/images/bosch-compress-3000-table.png)

At 15℃ ambient temperature, the Coefficient of Performance (COP) is 3.3. Over
an hour of operation, about 0.6 kWh of electricity will be consumed, and about
1.98kWh of energy will be added to the water.

We've found it an adequate system but if we were choosing again we'd choose a
system that can heat water faster.

Between sunset and 9am, we slowly consume hot water with two kids to bath,
two adult showers, some dishes, and an occasional hot load in the washing
machine. If the following day is around 15℃, our experience is the above table
is roughly accurate - it's not uncommon for the heat pump to run for ~8 hours,
consuming ~4.8kWh.

On a sunny winters day, we get about 5 hours of good output from our
north-facing solar panels. 5 is less than 8, so every day over winter we heat
some of our water with grid power. Adding additional solar panels won't help much -
north facing panels won't extend the 5 hour generation window, and west facing
panels are difficult on our roof.

There are more efficient (and expensive) options that provide an interesting
comparison. [Sanden](https://www.sanden-hot-water.com.au/) offer a 315 litre
tank that draws about 1kW and has a COP of 4.7 at 15℃ ambient temperature. Over
an hour of operation, about 1 kWh of electricity will be consumed and about
4.7kWh of energy will be added to the water. That's more than double the heat
output of the Bosch - partly due to the heat pump drawing more power, and
partly due to higher efficiency.[Reclaim](https://reclaimenergy.com.au/) have
an alternative that claims similar performance.

At that rate, the full tank can be heated in about 4 hours. Fast enough to
be 100% solar powered on a sunny Melbourne winters day.

Neither the Sanden or Reclaim units support integration with a solar inverter -
the feature that sold me on the Bosch. It turns out that's less valuable than I
assumed and I don't think it's enough to make the Bosch the best pick for us.
We **really** don't like lukewarm showers and to minimise the risk of one we've
found the heat pump needs the option to run daily for long enough to completely
heat the tank ( in winter: 8+ hours for the Bosch, 4+ hours for the
Sanden/Reclaim), even if the sun is hiding. Most days it won't need to operate
for the full window, but occasionally it will and that's super valuable.
Defining that window with a simple timer is probably good enough.

If you're in the market for a heat pump hot water system, I highly recommend
joining the [My Effiicient Electric
Home](https://www.facebook.com/groups/MyEfficientElectricHome) group on
facebook. Brian Tehan has [posted a spreadsheet comparing common
options](https://www.facebook.com/groups/MyEfficientElectricHome/permalink/2884986631545761)
in Australia and the numbers are interesting. Here's a sneak peek at the
estimated tank heating times:

![tank-heating](/images/tank-heating-table.png)

Now that we have the bosch, we obviously won't get rid of it. It does the job!
I'm tempted to make the most of it and explore replacing the inverter
integration with something more custom, maybe allowing the heat pump to run
when we're exporting to the grid **or** when our time of use power prices with
[Amber Electric](https://www.amberelectric.com.au/) are cheap.
