---
layout: post
title: "2020 in Running"
---

I've dabbled in running for about 8 years, but it was only in 2019 that I went
from an on-again off-again attempt to fit exercise in around kids and work to a
regular habit that I enjoyed.

In 2020 I consolidated the habit and averaged nearly 2 runs per week - a total
of 576Km over 90 runs. 

![veloviewer-2019-2020](/images/running-2020.png)

I focused on building routine and getting our regularly, rather than on
distance or speed. Still, over the year I set a distance PB
([17Km](https://www.strava.com/activities/4464359013)), [5Km
PB](https://www.strava.com/activities/3640663774) (23:43, 4:44mins/Km) and
[10Km PB](https://www.strava.com/activities/3143139720) (54:03, 5:24mins/Km).
It was the year of COVID and lockdowns, so mostly I was running on suburban
streets and local creek paths close to home.

I finally stopped running with my phone in hand while the Strava app recorded,
and bought a [Garmin forerunner 45](https://buy.garmin.com/en-AU/AU/p/641121/pn/010-02156-05).
It's brilliant - it does just what I need with no frills, even if [Garmin's
approach to security is
disconcerting](https://www.theverge.com/2020/8/4/21353842/garmin-ransomware-attack-wearables-wastedlocker-evil-corp).
My phone still comes along for music and podcasts (and Google Pay in an
emergency), but sits in a [flip
belt](https://flipbeltaustralia.com/product/flipbelt/) where I can mostly
ignore it. Headphones are a pair of [Samsung Galaxy
Buds](https://www.samsung.com/us/mobile/audio/galaxy-buds/) connected to the
phone via Bluetooth. They came free with my phone and they do the job.  Shoes
are [Vivo Barefoot Stealth
2](https://www.vivobarefoot.com/au/mens/active/stealth-ii-mens) that are past
due for replacing, and they'll absolutely be replaced by something from Vivo
Barefoot.

My main goal for 2021 is to continue making running a habit and to get out 104
times - twice per week. Within that I'd also like to run my first half marathon
(only 4Km to go!) and cover a total of at least 700Km. Let's hope the injury
gods are on my side.

