---
layout: post
title: "2021 in Running"
---
I enjoyed [reflecting on my running progress last
year](https://yob.id.au/2021/01/01/2020-in-running.html), so here's another go
for 2021.

My 2021 goals from the above post:

> My main goal for 2021 is to continue making running a habit and to get out 104
> times - twice per week. Within that I'd also like to run my first half marathon
> (only 4Km to go!) and cover a total of at least 700Km. Let's hope the injury
> gods are on my side.

I managed to hit all of these - 149 runs in total (2.86/week), 4 half marathons,
and a total of 1083km.

The linear-ish slope to the cumulative distance chart for the year is a nice
reflection of consistent outings - pandemic lockdowns and reduced socialising
unfortunately kept my calendar clear for running.

![veloviewer-2019-2020-2021](/images/running-2021.png)

Highlights were a [solo trail half marathon along the Great Ocean
Walk](https://www.strava.com/activities/4654562377) and [Run the
Gap](https://www.strava.com/activities/5341725408), an organised trail half
marathon in the Grampians/Gariwerd. When it was on, Parkrun was also a fun
excuse to socialise and a helpful aide to getting out regularly. I set a 5km PB
of [23:01](https://www.strava.com/activities/5528885902), and a 10Km PB of
[51:00](https://www.strava.com/activities/5105011892).

My gear is mostly unchanged. [Garmin forerunner 245
music](https://www.garmin.com/en-AU/p/646690) (a small bump on last years
forerunner 45), my phone for music and podcasts, [Samsung Galaxy
Buds](https://www.samsung.com/us/mobile/audio/galaxy-buds/), a [flip
belt](https://flipbeltaustralia.com/product/flipbelt/), and various Vivo
Barefoot shoes.

2022 goals: get out 156 times - 3 times/week - and cover 1200Km (100Km/month).
Both are only incremental improvements on 2021 and that's OK. Locking in the
habit of regular outings is the top goal (presumably around a busier calendar
with fewer lockdowns), distance and speed are secondary.  Still, a sub 2 hour
half marathon would be a nice bonus if I can manage it, as would shaving some
seconds off my 5km and 10km PBs.
